# Share-Bike-Station-Clustering-and-Usage-Prediction

Bike sharing systems have become increasingly popular around the world for its benefits in public health, environment, and urban mobility. Toronto has launched a bike sharing system in 2011 named Bike Share Toronto. By 2022, Bike Share Toronto has expanded their operations to provide users access to 6,850 bikes and 625 stations across the city. Managing the operations of such systems, however, requires a good understanding of bike usages. For instance, accurate information about bike usages is critical for developing optimal bike-to-station allocation strategies. In recent years, there has been a growing interest in adopting the cluster-then-predict approach, whereby bike stations are grouped into clusters first and bike demand predictions are made later for each cluster. While some previous studies have explored the cluster-then-predict approach, there still remains some gaps in interpreting the quality of bike clustering results as well as understanding the impact of cluster-to-cluster transitions on bike check-in predictions. Given these gaps, the thesis project Share Bike Station Clustering and Usage Prediction attempts to explore two research questions: first, examining how various station-to-cluster assignments may impact the bike check-out and check-in predictions, and second, understanding how transition information may influence the bike check-in predictions.

To achieve this, a five-step cluster-then-predict framework is developed. For starters, bike stations are grouped into clusters using the state-of-the-art Bipartite Clustering (BC) algorithm, which takes into account of information about both the geographical locations and station-to-station transition patterns of the bike stations. In the second step, the cluster-level hourly number of check-outs predictions are made using linear regression. In the third step, cluster-to-cluster transition matrices are computed to model the relationship between bike check-outs and check-ins between different bike station clusters. After this, the hourly number of check-outs and transition matrices from the previous two steps are used to predict the hourly number of check-ins. Lastly, the check-out and check-in predictions are evaluated by computing the mean squared error, root mean squared error, maximum residual error, and mean absolute error. Furthermore, this framework is applied on Bike Share Toronto’s 2019 ridership data and computational experiments are conducted to derive relevant insights.
